\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header              
@setfilename elephant.info
@settitle Elephant User Manual
@c %**end of header

@setchapternewpage odd

@copying
@quotation
Elephant System @*
Original Version, Copyright @copyright{} 2004 Ben Lee and Andrew Blumberg. @*
Version 0.5, Copyright @copyright{} 2006 Robert L. Read. @*
Versions 0.6-0.9, Copyright @copyright{} 2006-2007 Ian Eslick and Robert L. Read @*
Portions copyright respective contributors (see @file{CREDITS}). @*

Elephant Manual @*
Original Version, Copyright @copyright{} 2004 Ben Lee. @*
Versions 0.5-0.6, Copyright @copyright{} 2006 Robert L. Read. @*
Current Version, Copyright @copyright{} 2006-2007 Ian Eslick and Robert L. Read @*

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.  See the
Copyright and License chapter for details about copyright, license and
warranty for this manual and the Elephant system.

@end quotation
@end copying
     
@titlepage
@title Elephant User Manual
@subtitle Elephant version 0.9
@author By Ian Eslick with Robert Read and Ben Lee
     
@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
     
@ifnottex
@node Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@top Copyright
     
@insertcopying
     
@ifhtml
@menu
* Table of Contents::
@end menu

@chapheading Chapters

@menu
* Introduction::   Introduction to the Elephant Persistent Object System.
* Tutorial::       A basic ``getting started'' tutorial.
* Installation::   Installation and test-suite procedures.
* User Guide::     In depth discussion of all Elephant facilities and features.
* User API Reference:: Function and class documentation of the user API.
* Design Patterns::    Design scenarios for Elephant applications.
* Elephant Architecture::     An overview of elephant's internal architecture.
* Data Store API Reference::  Function level documentation for data store implementors.
* Copyright and License::     Your rights and freedoms.
@end menu

@chapheading Appendices

@menu
* Concept Index::
* Object Index::     
* Function / Macro Index::     
* Variable Index::     
* Colophon::     
@end menu
@end ifhtml

@node Table of Contents
@unnumbered
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@contents

@end ifnottex
     
@include intro.texinfo
@include tutorial.texinfo
@include installation.texinfo
@include user-guide.texinfo
@include reference.texinfo
@include scenarios.texinfo
@include elephant-design.texinfo
@include data-store-reference.texinfo
@include copying.texinfo

@node Concept Index
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@appendix Concept Index

@printindex cp

@node Object Index
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@appendix Object Index

@printindex tp

@node Function / Macro Index
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@appendix Function / Macro Index
     
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@appendix Variable Index
     
@printindex vr

@node Colophon
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@unnumbered Colophon

This manual is maintained in Texinfo, and automatically translated
into other forms (e.g. HTML or pdf). If you're @emph{reading} this
manual in one of these non-Texinfo translated forms, that's fine, but
if you want to @emph{modify} this manual, you are strongly advised to
seek out a Texinfo version and modify that instead of modifying a
translated version. Even better might be to seek out @emph{the}
Texinfo version (maintained at the time of this writing as part of the
Elephant project at
@uref{http://www.common-lisp.net/project/elephant/}) and submit a
patch.

@iftex
@shortcontents
@contents
@end iftex
@bye
