@c -*-texinfo-*-

@node SQL back-end
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@chapter SQL back-end
@cindex SQL back-end

@menu
* SQL-Introduction:: The design and status of the SQL back-end extention.
* Extention Status:: The current status of the SQL back-end extention.
* Back-compatibility:: Issues if you have already been using Elephant
* Multi-repository Operation:: Specifying repositories
* Setting up PostGres:: An example
* Repository Migration:: How to move objects from one repository to another
@end menu

@node SQL-Introduction
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@section SQL-Introduction

Although originally designed as an interface to the BerkeleyDB system,
the original Elephant system has been experimenetally extended to 
support the use of relational database management systems as the
implementation of the persistent store.  This relies on Kevin Rosenberg's
CL-SQL interface to relational systems.

Although the BerkeleyDB system is an ideal object store for LISP objects,
one might prefer the licensing of a different system.  For example, at 
the time of this writing, it is my interpretation that one cannot use
the BerkeleyDB system behind a public website 
http://www.sleepycat.com/download/licensinginfo.shtml#redistribute
unless one releases the entire web application as open source.

Neither the PostGres DBMS nor SQLite 3 has any such restriction.  Elephant itself is released
under the GPL.  It is somewhat debatable if the GPL allows one to construct
to construct a non-open-source web application but the preponderance of 
opinion appears to be that it does.  Thefore using Elephant and the other
GPLed software that it depends upon allows one to host a a non open-source
web application.  This might be a reason to use Elephant on PostGres of SQLite rather
than Elephant on BerkeleyDB.

Other reasons to use a relational database system might include:
familiarity with those systems, the fact that some part of your application
needs to use the truly relational aspects of those systems, preference for
the tools associated with those systems, etc.

The SQL back-end extention of Elephant provides a function for migrating
data seamlessly between repositories.  That is, one can quite easily move
data from a BerkeleyDB repository to a PostGres repository, and vice versa.
In fact, one of the most important aspects of the extention is that it 
makes Elephant a multi-repository system, rather than a single repository
system, as addition to allowing different implementation strategies for 
those repositories.  This offers at least the possiblity than once 
can develop using one backend, for example BerkeleyDB, and then later
move to MySQL.

At the time of this writing, the basic strategy for the SQL implementation
is quite simple.  The same serializer used for the Sleepycat implementation
is employed, the byte-string is base64 encoded, and placed in a single 
table which is managed by Elephant.

As of Elephant 0.3, Elephant has been tested to work with both Postgres, and 
SQLite 3, thanks do Dan Knapp.

@node Extention Status
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@section Extention Status

As far as is known at this writing, all functionality except nested transaction
support and cursor-put's that is supported by the BerkeleyDB backend is supported by the CL-SQL
based back-end.  Concurrency and transaction atomicity has not been tested well
for the CL-SQL based system.

Additionally, it is NOT the case that the Elephant system currently provides
transaction support across multiple repositories; it provides the transaction
support provided by the underlying repository to the user in a per-repository
basis.

The PostGres backend is as currently employed is about 5 times slower than 
the BerkeleyDB backend.  This could probably change with continued development.

CL-SQL supports a lot of DBMS systems, but only PostGres has been tested.

The SQL back-end extention has only been tested under SBCL 0.8.18.

The SQL back-end is as easy to use as the BerkeleyDB back-end.  However,
the multi-repository version somewhat complicates the underlying 
persistent object management.  At the time of this writing, the 
community has not decided if this extention will be a part of 
Elephant proper or a separate branch; if it is not made a part of 
Elephant proper, a user might prefer the simpler (and better maintained?)
system if they only want to use the BerkeleyDB back-end.


@node Back-compatibility
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@section Back-compatibility

The CL-SQL based extention is very back-compatible with any existing Elephant
application, except for two items.

First, the routines ``build-btree'' and ``build-index-btree'' should be used
in place of the previous approach to direct calls to make-instance.  This is
necessary, because the underlying class of the object depends on what repository
it is stored in.  These routines, like make-instance on persistent objects directly,
allow you to specify the store controller at creation time.  However, build-btree
and build-index-btree will use the global *store-controller* if no keyword
argument is provided.

Secondly, in addition to executing:
@lisp
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :elephant)
@end lisp
to load elephant, one must at least one of:
@lisp
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :ele-clsql)
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :ele-bdb)
@end lisp

To use SQLLite3, you must execute:
@lisp
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :ele-sqlite3)
@end lisp

depending on whether or not you wish to use the clsql backend or the BerkeleyDB 
backend, or both.

You will have to have the CL-SQL package installed.  Following the 
documentation for CL-SQL under the section ``How CLSQL finds and loads foreign
libraries'' you may need to do something like:
@lisp
(clsql:push-library-path "/usr/lib/")
@end lisp

before doing
@lisp
(asdf:oos 'asdf:load-op :clsql-postgresql-socket)
@end lisp

in order for clsql to find the PostGres library libpq.so, for example.

Without modifcation, Elephant uses this as it's lib path:
@lisp
/usr/local/share/common-lisp/elephant-0.3/
@end lisp

So you could put a symbolic link to libpq.so there, where libmemutil.so and 
libsleepycat.so will also reside.

Versions of CL-SQL older than 3.2.3 might require something different.

@node Multi-repository Operation
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@section Multi-repository Operation

Elephant now keeps a small hashtables that maps ``database specifications'' into
actual database connections.

If a database spec is a string, it is assumed to be a BerkeleyDB path.
If it is a list, it is a assumed to be a CL-SQL connection specification.
For example:
@lisp
ELE-TESTS> *testdb-path*
"/home/read/projects/elephant/elephant/tests/testdb/"
ELE-TESTS> *testpg-path*
(:postgresql "localhost.localdomain" "test" "postgres" "")
ELE-TESTS> 
@end lisp


The tests now have a function @code{do-all-tests-spec} that take a spec and 
based on its type attempt to open the correct kind of store controller and 
perform the tests.

The routine @code{get-controller} takes this specifiation.

The basic strategy is that the ``database specification'' object is stored in
every persistent object and collection so that the repository can be found.

In this way, objects that reside in different repositories can coexist within
the LISP object space, allowing data migration.




@node Setting up PostGres
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@section Setting up PostGres


To set up a PostGres based back end, you should:

@enumerate
@item Install postgres and make sure postmaster is running.

@item Create a database called ``test'' and set its permissions
to be reached by whatever connection specification you intend to use.  The
tests use: 

@lisp
(defvar *testpg-path*
'(:postgreql "localhost.localdomain" "test" "postgres" ""))
@end lisp

meaning that connections must be allowed to the database test, user ``postgres'',
no password, connected from the same machine ``localhost.localdomain''.
(This would be changed to something more secure in a real application.)
Typically you edit the file : pg_hba.conf to enable various kinds of connections
in postgres.

@item  Be sure to enable socket connection to postgres when you invoke the postmaster.

@item  Test that you can connect to the database with these credentials by running:

@code{ psql -h 127.0.0.1 -U postgres test}

Before you attempt to connect with Elephant.
@end enumerate


meaning that connections must be allowed to the database test, user ``postgres'',
no password, connected from the same machine ``localhost.localdomain''.
(This would be changed to something more secure in a real application.)

Furthermore, you must grant practically all creation/read/write privileges 
to the user postgres on this schema, so that it can construct the tables 
it needs.

Upon first opening a CL-SQL based store controller, the tables, indexes,
sequences, and so on needed by the Elephant system will be created in the 
schema named ``test'' automatically.

To run the tests, execute:

@lisp
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :elephant)
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :ele-clsql)
(asdf:oos 'asdf:load-op :clsql-postgresql-socket)
(in-package "ELEPHANT-TESTS")
(do-all-tests-spec *testpg-path*)
@end lisp

This should produce a small number of errors (about 7) for those test having 
to do with migration and the BerkeleyDB system specifically.

If you execute:

@lisp
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :ele-bdb)
@end lisp

Then connection to the BerkeleyDB system will be enabled, and you should 
be able to execute both

@lisp
(do-all-tests-spec *testpg-path*)
(do-all-tests-spec *testdb-path*)
@end lisp

with no errors in either case.

At present the system has only been tested under PostGres. Some code
parametrization would be required to work with other databases.

Setting up SQLite3 is even easier.  Install SQLite3 (I had to use
the source rather than the binary install, in order to get the dynamic
libraries constructed.)

An example use of SQLLite3 would be:
@lisp
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :elephant)
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :ele-clsql)
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :ele-sqlite3)
(in-package "ELEPHANT-TESTS")
(setq *test-path-primary* '(:sqlite3 "testdb"))
(do-all-tests-spec *test-path-primary*)
@end lisp

The file RUNTESTS.lisp, although possibly not exactly what you want,
contains useful example code.

You can of course migrate between the three currently supported repository
strategies in any combination: BDB, Postgresql, and SQLite3.

In all probability, other relational datbases would be very easy to 
support but have not yet been tested.  The basic pattern of 
the ``path'' specifiers is (cons clsqal-database-type-symbol (normal-clsql-connection-specifier)).

@node Repository Migration
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@section Repository Migration


This version of Elephant supports migration betwen store controllers,
whether of the same implementation strategy or not.

The tests @code{migrate1} - @code{migrate5} are demonstrations of this techinque.

The functions for performing these migrations are:

@code{migraten-pobj}

The name of this function is meant to imply that it is 
destructive of the object in question, mutating it to 
point at the new repository.

Which requies that you provide a copy-function to copy whatever 
slots you want from the persistent object as deeply or as shallowly 
as you desire.

Data collections (btree's) can be move with the function:

@code{migrate}

A simple object that does not inherit from ``persistent'' but is 
attached to a key (on the root) can be copied with the routine

@code{copy-from-key}

It is hoped that these routines would allow, with some labor,
a user to use one repository, and later decide to start using 
a different implementation strategy, and easily migrate the 
objects to the the new repository.  The old repository could
then be abandoned, or multiple repositories could be used
at the same time.

 
